---
title: "Pseudo-HTML and Pidgin CSS: Building an Email Newsletter"
published_at: 2017-08-02T14:52:31Z
hook: Building a toolchain for sending a newsletter, and
  the dismal state of HTML and CSS in email.
location: San Francisco
---

After a recent trip to Portland, I decided to try writing a
newsletter. I don't post on Facebook or other social very
often, and don't otherwise do a good job of staying in
touch with friends and family, so I'm always on the lookout
for ways to develop better habits to help address that.
I've been a subscriber to a few high quality newsletters
from other people for years and reading them is something I
really enjoy. Publishing my own seemed like a worthwhile
experiment to the end of of doing a better job of staying
connected.

As one of the holdouts who refuses to move to a centralized
publishing service (or publish content exclusively to a
social network), I also like the idea of supporting the
independent web. Bloggers used to have a powerful
distribution channel in the form of RSS, and although the
technology still exists today, but it's been fading for
years, with more people moving exclusively towards their
favorite social platform for content discovery. Email is a
flawed technology in many ways, but it's one of the few
communication channels that every connected person in the
world will reliably have, and it fully supports sending
rich media (images, links, videos, quotes, etc.) over open
standards, and even content more than 140 characters long.

There's nothing revelatory here, but I'll go through a few
of the tools and services that I used, and some of the
surprises along the way.

## The right shape of service (#service)

Initially I assumed that the best way to go would be
through one of the many newsletter services like MailChimp
or TinyLetter. Maybe it is, but in all the cases I looked
at they either wanted to paste a branded footer on the end
of everything you send, have you use a horrible WYSIWYG
editor, or both; I also wanted to archive old copies on the
web somewhere, and it was looking like I'd have to reinvent
a custom layer on top of whatever service I ended up using.

I sure wasn't about to start sending email myself, so I
still wanted to use a service, but kept looking for one
that exposed the right primitives. I wanted pixel perfect
control over the visuals, but to fully offload subscription
management to someone else.

After a little more Googling I discovered that Mailgun
offered an API for mailing lists. I've been using Mailgun
for sending mail for years at Heroku, then at Stripe, and
their service has been well-designed and reliable. Even
better, at the email volumes that I'll be working with I'm
unlikely to ever leave the free tier, and even beyond that
their prices are good. I poked around their control panel
for a while and experimented by sending a few messages to
myself with their Go SDK, and it was off to the races.

``` go
// Sample code working with the Mailgun SDK -- build a
// message, add HTML and plaintext content, and send away.

mg := mailgun.NewMailgun(mailDomain, conf.MailgunAPIKey, "")

message := mailgun.NewMessage(
    fromAddress,
    fmt.Sprintf("Passages & Glass %s â€” %s",
        passage.Issue, passage.Title)
    passage.ContentRaw,
    recipient)
message.SetReplyTo(replyToAddress)
message.SetHtml(html)

resp, _, err := mg.Send(message)
if err != nil {
    log.Fatal(err)
}
log.Printf(`Sent to: %s (response: "%s")`, recipient, resp)
```

## Pidgin CSS (#css)

Over the last few decades, we've had pretty good success in
standardizing how HTML and CSS are rendered across
browsers, and during the time some huge victories were won.
Progressively more sophisticated tests like Acid2 and Acid3
dragged browsers up to spec and established widespread
consistency in how they render the same code. Even
straggers like IE that most had deemed hopeless were made
to fall in line. I'd naively assumed that this was a war
that had long since been won, only to realize that on the
email front, the battle's still going, and has been
quagmired for years.

Email clients are a million miles away from rendering
anything that's even remotely compliant with anything, and
they're all uncompliant in their own exotic ways. Some
clients are better than others, and somewhat ironically the
companies that we tend to think of as the most advanced in
the world are some of the most regressive. If you threw
[Acid2][acid2] at Google Mail, you'd be lucky to see a lone
yellow pixel on screen.

The newsletter industry has dealt with this less than
optimal state of affairs by developing a form of "pidgin
CSS" made up of the lowest common denominator of what the
world's diverse set of clients will handle. [Campaign
Monitor's CSS support matrix][email-css] does a good job of
showing just how divergent (and underwhelming) feature
support is between clients. Best practice is to keep HTML
email as basic as possible. Fancy CSS keywords like `float`
are best avoided, anything developed this decade like
`flex` and `grid` are totally out, and `<table>` is still
the state of the art when it comes to building more complex
layouts.

I found that everything beyond the most trivially basic CSS
usually caused problems in at least one mail client (often
Google Mail):

* `<style>` tags aren't supported by Google Mail (meaning a
  very healthy fraction of all potential readers), so all
  CSS needs to be inlined like `<p style="...">`.
* Negative margins don't work.
* Descendant selectors (`#wrapper p`) and child selectors
  (`#wrapper > p`) can't be used (along with most other
  types of selectors).
* Ergonomic niceties like `rem` are out.

After a few false starts I fell back to a layout that
offers a maximum in the tradeoff between simplicity and
style: a single centered column. I wrote CSS in my
templates with normal `<style>` tags in my templates, and
used [Douceur][douceur] to inline it for email.

!fig src="/assets/newsletters/passages-001.png" caption="The first issue of Passages & Glass successfully rendering in Google Mail (after considerable pain)."

## The architecture of a newsletter (#architecture)

In the spirit of minimizing the number of components that
I'm maintaining, I reused the code written for this site
([sorg]) to render my newsletter's HTML and archives.

During development, [fswatch] feeds change events to a
build executable so that I can quickly iterate on content
and design. When I'm satisfied, [another executable][exec]
compiles the final HTML, inlines CSS, and generates a list
message using Mailgun's API. By default it sends a single
initial email to my personal address so that I can vet the
content a final time and keep an eye out for any rendering
problems that might be email-specific. An additional
`-live` argument sends it for real.

## Subscription management (#subscription-management)

Mailgun helps with list management by automatically
generating person-specific unsubscribe links, but there's
no equivalent for signing up new addresses. You can add new
addresses manually from their control panel, but they won't
host a form for you that allows users to subscribe.

My site is static, so I built a small form that runs as a
[Go executable][passages-signup] and provides this one
function. It's a little painful that I need to run a
separate service to handle this very mundane job, but it
should be micro enough enough that I won't have to look at
it very often. I chose Go for the job because it's got a
remarkable track record for API stability and minimal
upgrade churn. I'm hopeful that in ten years it'll still be
running with minimal intervention on my part.

## Passages & Glass (#passages)

My newsletter is called _Passages & Glass_. It's a digest
of many topics that interest me including travel, ideas,
products, and software, but with a few more personal
touches compared to what I'd put in a blog post. If this
sounds like something that interests you, consider [signing
up to receive it][signup]. I won't bother you often.

!fig src="/assets/newsletters/chihuly-glass.jpg" caption="My newsletter is called \"Passages & Glass.\" Here's a photo from the Chihuly Garden and Glass museum in Seattle."

[acid2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acid2
[douceur]: https://github.com/aymerick/douceur
[email-css]: https://www.campaignmonitor.com/css/
[exec]: https://github.com/brandur/sorg/blob/master/cmd/sorg-passages/main.go
[fswatch]: https://github.com/emcrisostomo/fswatch
[passages-signup]: https://github.com/brandur/passages-signup
[signup]: https://passages-signup.herokuapp.com
[sorg]: https://github.com/brandur/osrg
